PEP 695: Changes proposed as a result of implementation work (#3122)
python/peps: pep-0695.rst

    class ClassG[T: (list[S], str)]: ...  # Type checker error: generic type

Runtime Representation of Bounds and Constraints
------------------------------------------------

The upper bounds and constraints of ``TypeVar`` objects are accessible at
runtime through the ``__bound__`` and ``__constraints__`` attributes.
For ``TypeVar`` objects defined through the new syntax, these attributes

> become lazily evaluated, as discussed under "Lazy Evaluation" below.

Reviewer: I forget what the exact ReST syntax is, but it would be nice if we could directly link to the "Lazy Evaluation" section here

    class ClassG[T: (list[S], str)]: ...  # Type checker error: generic type

Runtime Representation of Bounds and Constraints
------------------------------------------------

The upper bounds and constraints of ``TypeVar`` objects are accessible at
runtime through the ``__bound__`` and ``__constraints__`` attributes.
For ``TypeVar`` objects defined through the new syntax, these attributes
become lazily evaluated: when constructed, the object stores a closure that
allows the evaluation of the value. When the ``__bound__`` or ``__constraints__``
attribute is accessed, the value is evaluated and cached. This is consistent
with the behavior of :pep:`649` and generally eliminates the need for quoted

> forward references. If :pep:`649` is accepted, the ``TypeVar`` class should

Reviewer 2: I don't understand that last sentence. Are you saying that the `TypeVar` class won't support deferred evaluation if PEP 649 is not accepted?

Reviewer 2: It may be worth clarifying that deferred evaluation will change the behavior in cases where the symbol is assigned different values. For example:

```python
X = int

def class Foo[T: X]:
    # print(T.__bound__)

X = str
```

With immediate evaluation, the bound will be `int`. With deferred evaluation, it will be `str` unless the `print` statement is uncommented, in which case it will still be `int`. I realize this is an edge case. I also realize it affects all deferred evaluation approaches, including deferred annotations using today's `from __future__ import annotations` mechanism.

Mental note to me: Pyright's current implementation of PEP 695 reports an error if the bound or constraints refers to a symbol that is not yet defined but is not quoted. I'll need to change this.

Author: My intent here is that if/when PEP 649 is implemented, we add something like an `__evaluate_bound__(self, format)` method, similar to the `__annotate__` method in PEP 649 (https://peps.python.org/pep-0649/#annotate-and-annotations). This will allow evaluating the bound to the "STRING" or "FORWARDREF" format. I will try to clarify that.

And yes, deferred evaluation can affect the behavior. I think I should add a section on "Deferred evaluation" to cover a number of these subtleties.

Author: Added an extended discussion of lazy evaluation.

include:

* ``__name__`` is a str representing the name of the type alias
* ``__type_params__`` is a tuple of ``TypeVar``, ``TypeVarTuple``, or
  ``ParamSpec`` objects that parameterize the type alias if it is generic
* ``__value__`` is the evaluated value of the type alias

All of these attributes are read-only.

> The value of the type alias is evaluated lazily (see "Lazy Evaluation" below).

Reviewer: Same here, a direct link would be nice :)

include:

* ``__name__`` is a str representing the name of the type alias
* ``__type_params__`` is a tuple of ``TypeVar``, ``TypeVarTuple``, or
  ``ParamSpec`` objects that parameterize the type alias if it is generic
* ``__value__`` is the evaluated value of the type alias

All of these attributes are read-only.

The value of the type alias is evaluated lazily. Access to the ``__value__`` attribute
triggers evaluation of the value and caches the resulting value.
This allows for self-referential and mutually recursive type aliases, and it

> should largely eliminate the need for quoted forward references in type aliases.

Reviewer 3: From in-person conversation there's an open question about whether `repr()` forces this evaluation, right?

Author: Do you think that should be specified in the PEP?

Author: But my takeaway from the conversation was that repr() should be something like this:
```
def __repr__(self):
    try:
        value = repr(self.__value__)
    except Exception:
        value = "an exception occurred while evaluating the value"
    return f"<type alias {self.__name__}: {value}>"
```

within inner scopes. As with other symbols in Python, an inner scope can
define its own symbol that overrides an outer-scope symbol of the same name.

Type parameters are visible to other

> type parameters declared elsewhere in the list. This allows type parameters

Reviewer: "Are visible to" was slightly unclear language to me -- maybe "can be referred to by"? Or something like that?

Author: I think this is standard nomenclature for scopes. For example, https://docs.python.org/3.12/reference/executionmodel.html#resolution-of-names uses it.

Reviewer: *Grumbles, mutters darkly*

...Fine

    # eliminate this limitation.
    class ClassA[S, T: Sequence[S]]: ...

>     # The following generates no compiler error, because the bound for ``S``

Reviewer 2: Pyright's current implementation enforces that the expression doesn't reference a type parameter later in the list. With this change, this will be legal at runtime, although it should still be a type-checker error (as you note below). I think that's the right answer, as I don't see a use case for it. It can also lead to perverse errors like circular dependencies.

```python
def class[S: list[T], T: list[S]]: ...
```

>     # The following generates no compiler error, because the bound for ``S``

Author: Yes, I think this behavior is not useful, but I don't see a good way to disallow it while still using lazy evaluation and without greatly complicating the implementation.

>     # The following generates no compiler error, because the bound for ``S``

Reviewer 2: Bounds cannot be generic; they need to be concrete, so this wouldn't work. 

Default type argument types (a'la PEP 696) can refer to other type parameters (e.g. `class C[S, T=S]: ...`), but I can't think of a case where it would make sense to refer to a later type parameter in a default expression. For example, `class C[S=T, T]: ...` doesn't make sense.

Accessing Type Parameters at Runtime
------------------------------------

> A new read-only attribute called ``__type_params__`` is available on generic class,
> function, and type alias objects. This attribute is a tuple of the

Reviewer: It was initially unclear to me reading this that "generic class" was being used as a compound adjective(?) here. This is slightly more verbose, but might be clearer:

```suggestion
A new read-only attribute called ``__type_params__`` is available on generic class objects,
function objects, and type alias objects. This attribute is a tuple of the
```

Author: Maybe just "generic classes, functions, and type aliases"?

Reviewer: Also works!

Accessing Type Parameters at Runtime
------------------------------------

A new read-only attribute called ``__type_params__`` is available on generic class,
function, and type alias objects. This attribute is a tuple of the
type parameters that parameterize the class, function, or alias.

> The tuple contains ``TypeVar``, ``ParamSpec``, and ``TypeVarTuple`` instances.

Reviewer 3: It is intentional that `__type_params__` only contains those typevars (etc.) introduced in this object's scope, right? As opposed to `__type_variables__` which included the visible ones from surrounding scopes. Because we no longer need those when we have PEP 649. Right?

Author: Yes, that's correct. My motivation is in https://github.com/erictraut/cpython/issues/10#issue-1679651222.

that are not yet defined. For example, type aliases may be recursive, or even mutually
recursive, and type variable bounds may refer back to the current class. If these
expressions were evaluated eagerly, users would need to enclose such expressions in
quotes to prevent runtime errors. :pep:`563` and :pep:`649` detail the problems with
this situation for type annotations.

To prevent a similar situation with the new syntax proposed in this PEP, we propose
to use lazy evaluation for these expressions, similar to the approach in :pep:`649`.
Specifically, each expression will be saved in a code object, and the code object
is evaluated only when the corresponding attribute is accessed (``TypeVar.__bound__``,
``TypeVar.__constraints__``, or ``TypeAlias.__value__``). After the value is
successfully evaluated, the value is saved and later calls will return the same value
without re-evaluating the code object.

If :pep:`649` is implemented, additional evaluation mechanisms should be added to
mirror the options that PEP provides for annotations. In the current version of the
PEP, that might include adding an ``__evaluate_bound__`` method to ``TypeVar`` taking

> a ``format`` parameter with the same meaning as in PEP 649's ``__annotate__`` method.

Author: ```suggestion
a ``format`` parameter with the same meaning as in PEP 649's ``__annotate__`` method
(and a similar ``__evaluate_constraints__`` method, as well as an ``__evaluate_value__``
method on ``TypeAliasType``).
```

        | ParamSpec(identifier name)
        | TypeVarTuple(identifier name)

Bounds and constraints are represented identically in the AST. In the implementation,

> any expression that is syntactically a tuple is treated as a constraint, and any other

Reviewer: "syntactically a tuple" is a little opaque to me -- if you're referring to how this will be represented in the AST, I'd prefer it if you just said that :)

expression is treated as a bound.

It also modifies existing AST node types ``FunctionDef``, ``AsyncFunctionDef``
and ``ClassDef`` to include an additional optional attribute called
``typeparams`` that includes a list of type parameters associated with the
function or class.

Lazy Evaluation
---------------

This PEP introduces three new contexts where expressions may occur that represent
static types: ``TypeVar`` bounds, ``TypeVar`` constraints, and the value of type

> aliases. As with type annotations, these expressions may contain references to names
> that are not yet defined. For example, type aliases may be recursive, or even mutually

Reviewer: I found the "as with type annotations" bit somewhat confusing, since forward references in type annotations don't work at the moment at runtime, unless you have `from __future__ import annotations` at the top or the forward reference is in quotes.

Maybe something like this would be clearer?

```suggestion
aliases. As with type annotations, a type checker should not emit an error if these expressions contain references to names
that are not yet defined. For example, type aliases may be recursive, or even mutually
```

Author: I feel like that puts too much emphasis on type checkers. The primary purpose here is to make it easy for humans to understand and read the code, and we should design type checkers so that they understand the code we want.

Reviewer: We could also just do this?

```suggestion
aliases. These expressions may contain references to names
that are not yet defined. For example, type aliases may be recursive, or even mutually
```

Author: Done!

   X = str
   print(Foo.u.__bound__)  # prints "str"

Similar examples affecting type annotations can be constructed using the
semantics of PEP 563 or PEP 649.

A naive implementation of lazy evaluation would handle class namespaces
incorrectly, because functions within a class do not normally have access to
the enclosing class namespace. The implementation will retain a reference to
the class namespace so that class-scoped names are resolved correctly.

.. _695-scoping-behavior:

Scoping Behavior
----------------

The new syntax requires a new kind of scope that behaves differently
from existing scopes in Python. Thus, the new syntax cannot be described exactly in terms of
existing Python scoping behavior. This section specifies these scopes
further by reference to existing scoping behavior: the new scopes behave
like function scopes, except for a number of minor differences listed below.

All examples include functions introduced with the pseudo-keyword ``def695``.
This keyword will not exist in the actual language; it is used to
clarify that the new scopes are for the most part like function scopes.

``def695`` scopes differ from regular function scopes in the following ways:

> - If a ``def965`` scope is immediately within a class scope, or within another

Reviewer 4: drive by
```suggestion
- If a ``def695`` scope is immediately within a class scope, or within another
```

Author: Good thing this is not actually becoming a keyword :)

        | ParamSpec(identifier name)
        | TypeVarTuple(identifier name)

Bounds and constraints are represented identically in the AST. In the implementation,
any expression that is syntactically a tuple is treated as a constraint, and any other

> expression is treated as a bound.

Reviewer 3: Isn't this a little too pragmatic and subtle?

Author: Possibly. An alternative could be to recognize this in the parser and produce a separate AST node. That would be more complicated to implement, and possibly create an ambiguous parse tree.

Several classes in the ``typing`` module that are currently implemented in
Python must be reimplemented in C. This includes: ``TypeVar``,
``TypeVarTuple``, ``ParamSpec``, and ``Generic``. The new class
``TypeAliasType`` (described above) also must be implemented in C. The

> documented behaviors of these classes should not change.

Reviewer 3: Didn't we agree to leave some of this in Python? This paragraph uses "must" which feels that would violate the PEP (even though we heard from Emily that this isn't an SC requirement).

Author: Good point, I'll make this less definite.

the enclosing class namespace. The implementation will retain a reference to
the class namespace so that class-scoped names are resolved correctly.

.. _695-scoping-behavior:

Scoping Behavior
----------------

> The new syntax requires a new kind of scope that behaves differently

Reviewer 5: I think I can follow this explanation, but I'd happier if the examples used the new scope without trying to make it look like a function.

A function definition defines a scope, but it also is a statement that creates a function.
The new scopes do not create functions (the implementation might, but there is no requirement for them to do so).

I think the comparison to functions is misleading.

Author: In what way is it misleading? The new scope behaves like a function scope in terms of the behavior of cell variables, nonlocals, etc., so the comparison to functions provides a convenient way to inherit from that behavior. We could use an alternative syntax (like your `let` suggestion), but I believe it would make the equivalence harder to understand, as we'd have to explain more about exactly how `let` works.

from existing scopes in Python. Thus, the new syntax cannot be described exactly in terms of
existing Python scoping behavior. This section specifies these scopes
further by reference to existing scoping behavior: the new scopes behave
like function scopes, except for a number of minor differences listed below.

All examples include functions introduced with the pseudo-keyword ``def695``.
This keyword will not exist in the actual language; it is used to
clarify that the new scopes are for the most part like function scopes.

``def695`` scopes differ from regular function scopes in the following ways:

- If a ``def965`` scope is immediately within a class scope, or within another
  ``def695`` scope that is immediately within a class scope, then names defined
  in that class scope can be accessed within the ``def695`` scope. (Regular functions,

>   by contranst, cannot access names defined within an enclosing class scope.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  by contrast, cannot access names defined within an enclosing class scope.)
```

Author: Thankns!

> - The following constructs are disallowed anywhere within a ``def695`` scope, though

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The following constructs are disallowed anywhere at the top level within a ``def695`` scope, though
```

Author: How about this instead:
```suggestion
- The following constructs are disallowed directly within a ``def695`` scope, though
```

Reviewer: That also works, though I find it slightly less clear. Could also do this:

```suggestion
- The following constructs are disallowed at the top level in a ``def695`` scope, though
```

Author: I don't like using the term "top level" here because to me it strongly suggests the module scope.

Reviewer: "outermost level"?

Author: That would sound like there are multiple levels of def695 scopes, and you can use a walrus in the inner level of def695 scopes. I think the "directly within" wording is fine, as the same sentence makes clear that the restriction doesn't apply in nested scopes of other kinds.

  they may be used within regular functions nested inside a ``def695`` scope:

  - ``yield``
  - ``yield from``
  - ``await``
  - ``:=`` (walrus operator)

> - The qualified name (``__qualname__``) of objects (classes and functions) defined within ``def695`` scopes

Reviewer 5: This would be clearer if you just said that the new scopes do not affect `__qualname__`. In fact, maybe you can omit this altogether. Is there any reason why the reader would think that `__qualname__` is affected?

Author: Well, that flows out of the comparison to functions: if these really were functions, then the qualname of a generic function would be something like `__generic_parameters_of_f.<locals>.f`, and we don't want that.

Author: It's true that this is a context where the equivalence to function scopes doesn't work well, but overall def695 scopes are still very much like functions; if we defined them in some other way, we'd have a lot more cases to define.
